
Common and Standard Directory
=============================

The `hl2b/cs/` directory contains the code for this
implementation of the `hl` [Common][1] and [Standard][2]
Layers.

[1]: http://hl-language.sourceforge.net/legit-common.html
[2]: http://hl-language.sourceforge.net/legit-standard.html

Note that code for both Layers are interspersed with one
another; the main difference is the package they are put in.
In addition, because this *is* an implementation of `hl`,
it makes use of the `<impl>` package for many private
details.

In some cases, for `<common>`, we use the IDEAL-REAL macro
to show a possible (but possibly slow) implementation in
actual, standards-compliant `hl`, then show how it's
actually implemented in this implementation using special
bytecodes or built-in functions.  Mostly the `REAL` part is
just a reference to the built-in whatever, since it would
be implemented in C++.


File Naming
-----------

Files are named in the form `NNNNNN-description.hl`, where
`NNNNNN` is a six-digit decimal number.  Files are
intended to be compiled and executed in the order of the
given decimal number.

Since it may be necessary at some point in the future to
insert files between other files, the numbering is started
at `001000` and skips 1000 each time, until we do need to
insert files between  others, in which case the skip isn't
1000 anymore.

This convention allows us to easily see how files are
expected to be loaded in order, just from listing this
directory.


Contexting
----------

Each file assumes that it is given its own context.  That
is, it assumes that it is "loaded" independently of each
other, and that any imported symbols from one file do not
affect any other file.

